Aaron Ralston, a 27-year-old mountain sports fanatic from Colorado in the United States, found himself in dire straits* alone in a canyon* in the desert when a 500kg rock came crashing down the canyon to smash his right hand and trap it against the canyon wall. A terrible accident, but the situation was made all the more serious because on this occasion Aaron had failed to tell anyone where he was going. At the last minute the plans for a trip with his climbing partners had fallen through, and on the spur of the moment he decided to head out on his own to cycle up a long mountain trail, leave his bike and then walk down the Blue John canyon. No one had the slightest idea where he was.
After three days of not seeing or hearing any sign of life Aaron realised he would die there if he didn't do something drastic. The course of action was horrific, but there was no other way. He would have to amputate his right hand. Fortunately he had a small multitool knife with him and he had some straps that he could use to make a tourniquet to stop himself bleeding to death when he cut the arteries. The knife had two blades. When he tried with the larger blade he found that it was too blunt to cut the skin.
The following day he found the courage to try the shorter blade, and with that he managed to cut through the skin. Only when he had made a large hole in his arm did he realise that it was going to be impossible to use any of the little tools on his knife to cut through the bones. After another 24 hours of pain and despair the idea and the strength came to him in a flash on the sixth day. With a final burst of energy he broke both bones in his arm and freed himself.
The ordeal was not over, though. He was still a long way from help. He had to carefully strap up his right arm and then find a way of lowering himself down a 20m drop in the canyon with a rope and only his left arm, and then walk the 10 km back to his car. Despite his ingenuity* and all his efforts he would have bled to death if it hadn't been for a very happy coincidence: the moment he got out of the canyon into the open desert the rescue helicopter just happened to be flying overhead.
One of the doctors at the hospital recalls being impressed to see Ralston walk into the hospital on his own, in spite of his injuries and the gruelling experience of being in the desert for six days with almost nothing to eat and only a couple of litres of water. He describes the amputation as remarkable. "It's a perfect example of someone improvising in a dire situation*," he said. "He took a small knife and was able to amputate his arm in such a way that he did not bleed to death."
Slim and pale with short reddish-brown hair, Ralston believes that his story was not simply about an isolated individual who rose to a formidable challenge. For him there was a spiritual* dimension to the experience. In his news conference he said, "I may never fully understand the spiritual aspects of what I experienced, but I will try. The source of the power I felt was the thoughts and prayers of many people, most of whom I will never know."
Under a bluebird sky out in the desert, I leave my truck where the trail begins for Horseshoe Canyon. My plan is to make a 30-mile circuit cycling up Horshoe Canyon, leaving the bike at the top and then coming down Blue John Canyon on foot.
The trip was a last-minute decision after some friends had called off a mountaineering trip. Usually I would leave a detailed schedule with my roommates, but since I left without knowing what I was going to do, the only word I gave was "Utah."
Though the Blue John circuit will be only a day trip, I'm carrying a 13 kilo pack, most of the weight taken up with climbing gear for descending the steep canyon system, food, and four litres of water.
By 2:30, I'm about seven miles into the canyon, at the midpoint of my descent, where the canyon is not more than 1 metre wide. To get down a steep drop I try to hang off the edge of a boulder* which is stuck between the walls of the canyon. Just before I let go of it I feel it move and I know this isn't good. As soon as I land on the floor of the canyon I hardly have time to look up before the boulder comes crashing down. In the narrow space I cannot avoid the boulder. Before I have time to realise what is happening it bounces against one wall and then smashes my right arm against the other wall and stops there.
The agony throws me into a panic. "F***!" I yank* my arm three times in a futile attempt to pull it out from under the rock. But I'm stuck. There is no way I can pull it out or move the boulder.
There is no feeling in my right hand at all and it is already turning grey.
My immediate worry is water. The average survival time in the desert without water is between two and three days. My next thought is escape. Eliminating ideas that are just too dumb (like breaking open my AA batteries on the boulder and hoping the acid* eats into the stone but not my arm), I decide to try to chip away the rock around my hand with my multitool knife. This proves to be a terribly slow process.
Even if I wanted to sleep, I couldn't. My hand is trapped too high up so I can't lie down, and as soon as my knees bend and my weight pulls on my wrist* the pain is agonizing. Using a rope and some of my climbing gear I manage to fix a kind of seat with my left hand. That helps me take the weight off my feet although I soon realise that the straps restrict the blood supply and I can't sit in it for more than 20 minutes.